.. -*- mode: rst; coding: utf-8 -*-

=============
Gamemastering
=============


.. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11984652/bold-italic-in-restructuredtext

.. raw:: html

   <style type="text/css">
     span.bolditalic {
       font-weight: bold;
       font-style: italic;
     }
   </style>

.. role:: bi
   :class: bolditalic


Conditions
==========

Conditions alter a creature's capabilities in a variety of ways and can
arise as a result of a spell, a class feature, a monster's attack, or
other effect. Most conditions, such as blinded, are impairments, but a
few, such as invisible, can be advantageous.

A condition lasts either until it is countered (the prone condition is
countered by standing up, for example) or for a duration specified by
the effect that imposed the condition.

If multiple effects impose the same condition on a creature, each
instance of the condition has its own duration, but the condition's
effects don't get worse. A creature either has a condition or doesn't.

The following definitions specify what happens to a creature while it is
subjected to a condition.

Blinded
-------

-  A blinded creature can't see and automatically fails any ability
   check that requires sight.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have advantage, and the creature's
   attack rolls have disadvantage.

Charmed
-------

-  A charmed creature can't attack the charmer or target the charmer
   with harmful abilities or magical effects.

-  The charmer has advantage on any ability check to interact socially
   with the creature.

Deafened
--------

-  A deafened creature can't hear and automatically fails any ability
   check that requires hearing.

Exhaustion
----------

Some special abilities and environmental hazards, such as starvation and
the long-term effects of freezing or scorching temperatures, can lead to
a special condition called exhaustion. Exhaustion is measured in six
levels. An effect can give a creature one or more levels of exhaustion,
as specified in the effect's description.

.. table:: Conditions: Exhaustion Effects

  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+
  | Level | Effect                                           |
  +=======+==================================================+
  | 1     | Disadvantage on ability checks                   |
  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+
  | 2     | Speed halved                                     |
  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+
  | 3     | Disadvantage on attack rolls and saving throws   |
  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+
  | 4     | Hit point maximum halved                         |
  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+
  | 5     | Speed reduced to 0                               |
  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+
  | 6     | Death                                            |
  +-------+--------------------------------------------------+

If an already exhausted creature suffers another effect that causes
exhaustion, its current level of exhaustion increases by the amount
specified in the effect's description.

A creature suffers the effect of its current level of exhaustion as well
as all lower levels. For example, a creature suffering level 2
exhaustion has its speed halved and has disadvantage on ability checks.

An effect that removes exhaustion reduces its level as specified in the
effect's description, with all exhaustion effects ending if a creature's
exhaustion level is reduced below 1.

Finishing a long rest reduces a creature's exhaustion level by 1,
provided that the creature has also ingested some food and drink. Also,
being raised from the dead reduces a creature's exhaustion level by 1.

Frightened
----------

-  A frightened creature has disadvantage on ability checks and attack
   rolls while the source of its fear is within line of sight.

-  The creature can't willingly move closer to the source of its fear.

Grappled
--------

-  A grappled creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't benefit from any
   bonus to its speed.

-  The condition ends if the grappler is incapacitated (see the
   condition).

-  The condition also ends if an effect removes the grappled creature
   from the reach of the grappler or grappling effect, such as when a
   creature is hurled away by the *thunder-wave* spell.

Incapacitated
-------------

-  An incapacitated creature can't take actions or reactions.

Invisible
---------

-  An invisible creature is impossible to see without the aid of magic
   or a special sense. For the purpose of hiding, the creature is
   heavily obscured. The creature's location can be detected by any
   noise it makes or any tracks it leaves.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have disadvantage, and the
   creature's attack rolls have advantage.

Paralyzed
---------

-  A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see the condition) and can't
   move or speak.

-  The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity saving
   throws.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.

-  Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if the attacker
   is within 5 feet of the creature.

Petrified
---------

-  A petrified creature is transformed, along with any nonmagical object
   it is wearing or carrying, into a solid inanimate substance (usually
   stone). Its weight increases by a factor of ten, and it ceases aging.

-  The creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't move or
   speak, and is unaware of its surroundings.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.

-  The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity saving
   throws.

-  The creature has resistance to all damage.

-  The creature is immune to poison and disease, although a poison or
   disease already in its system is suspended, not neutralized.

Poisoned
--------

-  A poisoned creature has disadvantage on attack rolls and ability
   checks.

Prone
-----

-  A prone creature's only movement option is to crawl, unless it stands
   up and thereby ends the condition.

-  The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls.

-  An attack roll against the creature has advantage if the attacker is
   within 5 feet of the creature. Otherwise, the attack roll has
   disadvantage.

.. _restrained:

Restrained
----------

-  A restrained creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't benefit from
   any bonus to its speed.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have advantage, and the creature's
   attack rolls have disadvantage.

-  The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity saving throws.

Stunned
-------

-  A stunned creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't move,
   and can speak only falteringly.

-  The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity saving
   throws.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.

Unconscious
-----------

-  An unconscious creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't
   move or speak, and is unaware of its surroundings

-  The creature drops whatever it's holding and falls prone.

-  The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity saving
   throws.

-  Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.

-  Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if the attacker
   is within 5 feet of the creature.

Pantheons
=========

The Celtic, Egyptian, Greek, and Norse pantheons are fantasy
interpretations of historical religions from our world's ancient times.
They include deities that are most appropriate for use in a game,
divorced from their historical context in the real world and united into
pantheons that serve the needs of the game.

The Celtic Pantheon
-------------------

It's said that something wild lurks in the heart of every soul, a space
that thrills to the sound of geese calling at night, to the whispering
wind through the pines, to the unexpected red of mistletoe on an oak â€” and
it is in this space that the Celtic gods dwell. They sprang from the
brook and stream, their might heightened by the strength of the oak and
the beauty of the woodlands and open moor. When the first forester dared
put a name to the face seen in the bole of a tree or the voice babbling
in a brook, these gods forced themselves into being.

The Celtic gods are as often served by druids as by clerics, for they
are closely aligned with the forces of nature that druids revere.

.. table:: Pantheons: Celtic Deities

  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Deity                         | Alignment  | Suggested     | Symbol               |
  |                               |            | Domains       |                      |
  +===============================+============+===============+======================+
  | The Daghdha, god of weather   | CG         | Nature,       | Bubbling cauldron or |
  | and crops                     |            | Trickery      | shield               |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Arawn, god of life and death  | NE         | Life, Death   | Black star on gray   |
  |                               |            |               | background           |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Belenus, god of sun, light,   | NG         | Light         | Solar disk and       |
  | and warmth                    |            |               | standing stones      |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Brigantia, goddess of rivers  | NG         | Life          | Footbridge           |
  | and livestock                 |            |               |                      |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Diancecht, god of medicine    | LG         | Life          | Crossed oak and      |
  | and healing                   |            |               | mistletoe branches   |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Dunatis, god of mountains and | N          | Nature        | Red sun-capped       |
  | peaks                         |            |               | mountain peak        |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Goibhniu, god of smiths and   | NG         | Knowledge,    | Giant mallet over    |
  | healing                       |            | Life          | sword                |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Lugh, god of arts, travel,    | CN         | Knowledge,    | Pair of long hands   |
  | and commerce                  |            | Life          |                      |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Manannan mac Lir, god of      | LN         | Nature,       | Wave of white water  |
  | oceans and sea creatures      |            | Tempest       | on green             |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Math Mathonwy, god of magic   | NE         | Knowledge     | Staff                |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Morrigan, goddess of battle   | CE         | War           | Two crossed spears   |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Nuada, god of war and         | N          | War           | Silver hand on black |
  | warriors                      |            |               | background           |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Oghma, god of speech and      | NG         | Knowledge     | Unfurled scroll      |
  | writing                       |            |               |                      |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+
  | Silvanus, god of nature and   | N          | Nature        | Summer oak tree      |
  | forests                       |            |               |                      |
  +-------------------------------+------------+---------------+----------------------+


The Greek Pantheon
------------------

The gods of Olympus make themselves known with the gentle lap of waves
against the shores and the crash of the thunder among the
cloud-enshrouded peaks. The thick boar-infested woods and the sere,
olive-covered hillsides hold evidence of their passing. Every aspect of
nature echoes with their presence, and they've made a place for
themselves inside the human heart, too.

.. table:: Pantheons: Greek Deities

  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Deity                      | Alignment| Suggested      | Symbol                  |
  |                            |          | Domains        |                         |
  +============================+==========+================+=========================+
  | Zeus, god of the sky,      | N        | Tempest        | Fist full of lightning  |
  | ruler of the gods          |          |                | bolts                   |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Aphrodite, goddess of love | CG       | Light          | Sea shell               |
  | and beauty                 |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Apollo, god of light,      | CG       | Knowledge,     | Lyre                    |
  | music, and healing         |          | Life, Light    |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Ares, god of war and       | CE       | War            | Spear                   |
  | strife                     |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Artemis, goddess of        | NG       | Life, Nature   | Bow and arrow on lunar  |
  | hunting and childbirth     |          |                | disk                    |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Athena, goddess of wisdom  | LG       | Knowledge, War | Owl                     |
  | and civilization           |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Demeter, goddess of        | NG       | Life           | Mare's head             |
  | agriculture                |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Dionysus, god of mirth and | CN       | Life           | Thyrsus (staff tipped   |
  | wine                       |          |                | with pine cone)         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hades, god of the          | LE       | Death          | Black ram               |
  | underworld                 |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hecate, goddess of magic   | CE       | Knowledge,     | Setting moon            |
  | and the moon               |          | Trickery       |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hephaestus, god of         | NG       | Knowledge      | Hammer and anvil        |
  | smithing and craft         |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hera, goddess of marriage  | CN       | Trickery       | Fan of peacock feathers |
  | and intrigue               |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hercules, god of strength  | CG       | Tempest, War   | Lion's head             |
  | and adventure              |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hermes, god of travel and  | CG       | Trickery       | Caduceus (winged staff  |
  | commerce                   |          |                | and serpents)           |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Hestia, goddess of home    | NG       | Life           | Hearth                  |
  | and family                 |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Nike, goddess of victory   | LN       | War            | Winged woman            |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Pan, god of nature         | CN       | Nature         | Syrinx (pan pipes)      |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Poseidon, god of the sea   | CN       | Tempest        | Trident                 |
  | and earthquakes            |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+
  | Tyche, goddess of good     | N        | Trickery       | Red pentagram           |
  | fortune                    |          |                |                         |
  +----------------------------+----------+----------------+-------------------------+

The Egyptian Pantheon
---------------------

These gods are a young dynasty of an ancient divine family, heirs to the
rulership of the cosmos and the maintenance of the divine principle of
Ma'at â€” the fundamental order of truth, justice, law, and order that puts
gods, mortal pharaohs, and ordinary men and women in their logical and
rightful place in the universe.

The Egyptian pantheon is unusual in having three gods responsible for
death, each with different alignments. Anubis is the lawful neutral god
of the afterlife, who judges the souls of the dead. Set is a chaotic
evil god of murder, perhaps best known for killing his brother Osiris.
And Nephthys is a chaotic good goddess of mourning.

.. table:: Pantheons: Egyptian Deities

  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Deity                       | Alignment  | Suggested      | Symbol                |
  |                             |            | Domains        |                       |
  +=============================+============+================+=======================+
  | Re-Horakhty, god of the     | LG         | Life, Light    | Solar disk encircled  |
  | sun, ruler of the gods      |            |                | by serpent            |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Anubis, god of judgment and | LN         | Death          | Black jackal          |
  | death                       |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Apep, god of evil, fire,    | NE         | Trickery       | Flaming snake         |
  | and serpents                |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Bast, goddess of cats and   | CG         | War            | Cat                   |
  | vengeance                   |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Bes, god of luck and music  | CN         | Trickery       | Image of the          |
  |                             |            |                | misshapen deity       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Hathor, goddess of love,    | NG         | Life, Light    | Horned cowÊ¼s head     |
  | music, and motherhood       |            |                | with lunar disk       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Imhotep, god of crafts and  | NG         | Knowledge      | Step pyramid          |
  | medicine                    |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Isis, goddess of fertility  | NG         | Knowledge,     | Ankh and star         |
  | and magic                   |            | Life           |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Nephthys, goddess of death  | CG         | Death          | Horns around a lunar  |
  | and grief                   |            |                | disk                  |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Osiris, god of nature and   | LG         | Life, Nature   | Crook and flail       |
  | the underworld              |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Ptah, god of crafts,        | LN         | Knowledge      | Bull                  |
  | knowledge, and secrets      |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Set, god of darkness and    | CE         | Death,         | Coiled cobra          |
  | desert storms               |            | Tempest,       |                       |
  |                             |            | Trickery       |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Sobek, god of water and     | LE         | Nature,        | Crocodile head with   |
  | crocodiles                  |            | Tempest        | horns and plumes      |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Thoth, god of knowledge and | N          | Knowledge      | Ibis                  |
  | wisdom                      |            |                |                       |
  +-----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+

The Norse Pantheon
------------------

Where the land plummets from the snowy hills into the icy fjords below,
where the longboats draw up on to the beach, where the glaciers flow
forward and retreat with every fall and spring â€” this is the land of the
Vikings, the home of the Norse pantheon. It's a brutal clime, and one
that calls for brutal living. The warriors of the land have had to adapt
to the harsh conditions in order to survive, but they haven't been too
twisted by the needs of their environment. Given the necessity of
raiding for food and wealth, it's surprising the mortals turned out as
well as they did. Their powers reflect the need these warriors had for
strong leadership and decisive action. Thus, they see their deities in
every bend of a river, hear them in the crash of the thunder and the
booming of the glaciers, and smell them in the smoke of a burning
longhouse.

The Norse pantheon includes two main families, the Aesir (deities of war
and destiny) and the Vanir (gods of fertility and prosperity). Once
enemies, these two families are now closely allied against their common
enemies, the giants (including the gods Surtur and Thrym).

.. table:: Pantheons: Norse Deities

  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Deity                      | Alignment  | Suggested      | Symbol                |
  |                            |            | Domains        |                       |
  +============================+============+================+=======================+
  | Odin, god of knowledge and | NG         | Knowledge, War | Watching blue eye     |
  | war                        |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Aegir, god of the sea and  | NE         | Tempest        | Rough ocean waves     |
  | storms                     |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Balder, god of beauty and  | NG         | Life, Light    | Gem-encrusted silver  |
  | poetry                     |            |                | chalice               |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Forseti, god of justice    | N          | Light          | Head of a bearded man |
  | and law                    |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Frey, god of fertility and | NG         | Life, Light    | Ice-blue greatsword   |
  | the sun                    |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Freya, goddess of          | NG         | Life           | Falcon                |
  | fertility and love         |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Frigga, goddess of birth   | N          | Life, Light    | Cat                   |
  | and fertility              |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Heimdall, god of           | LG         | Light, War     | Curling musical horn  |
  | watchfulness and loyalty   |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Hel, goddess of the        | NE         | Death          | Woman's face, rotting |
  | underworld                 |            |                | on one side           |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Hermod, god of luck        | CN         | Trickery       | Winged scroll         |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Loki, god of thieves and   | CE         | Trickery       | Flame                 |
  | trickery                   |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Njord, god of sea and wind | NG         | Nature,        | Gold coin             |
  |                            |            | Tempest        |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Odur, god of light and the | CG         | Light          | Solar disk            |
  | sun                        |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Sif, goddess of war        | CG         | War            | Upraised sword        |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Skadi, god of earth and    | N          | Nature         | Mountain peak         |
  | mountains                  |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Surtur, god of fire giants | LE         | War            | Flaming sword         |
  | and war                    |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Thor, god of storms and    | CG         | Tempest, War   | Hammer                |
  | thunder                    |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Thrym, god of frost giants | CE         | War            | White double-bladed   |
  | and cold                   |            |                | axe                   |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Tyr, god of courage and    | LN         | Knowledge, War | Sword                 |
  | strategy                   |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+
  | Uller, god of hunting and  | CN         | Nature         | Longbow               |
  | winter                     |            |                |                       |
  +----------------------------+------------+----------------+-----------------------+


Planes
======

The cosmos teems with a multitude of worlds as well as myriad alternate
dimensions of reality, called the **planes of existence**. It
encompasses every world where GMs run their adventures, all within the
relatively mundane realm of the Material Plane. Beyond that plane are
domains of raw elemental matter and energy, realms of pure thought and
ethos, the homes of demons and angels, and the dominions of the gods.

Many spells and magic items can draw energy from these planes, summon
the creatures that dwell there, communicate with their denizens, and
allow adventurers to travel there. As your character achieves greater
power and higher levels, you might walk on streets made of solid fire or
test your mettle on a battlefield where the fallen are resurrected with
each dawn.

The Material Plane
------------------

The Material Plane is the nexus where the philosophical and elemental
forces that define the other planes collide in the jumbled existence of
mortal life and mundane matter. All fantasy gaming worlds exist within
the Material Plane, making it the starting point for most campaigns and
adventures. The rest of the multiverse is defined in relation to the
Material Plane.

The worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely diverse, for they
reflect the creative imagination of the GMs who set their games there,
as well as the players whose heroes adventure there. They include
magic-wasted desert planets and island-dotted water worlds, worlds where
magic combines with advanced technology and others trapped in an endless
Stone Age, worlds where the gods walk and places they have abandoned.

Beyond the Material
-------------------

Beyond the Material Plane, the various planes of existence are realms of
myth and mystery. They're not simply other worlds, but different
qualities of being, formed and governed by spiritual and elemental
principles abstracted from the ordinary world.

Planar Travel
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When adventurers travel into other planes of existence, they are
undertaking a legendary journey across the thresholds of existence to a
mythic destination where they strive to complete their quest. Such a
journey is the stuff of legend. Braving the realms of the dead, seeking
out the celestial servants of a deity, or bargaining with an efreeti in
its home city will be the subject of song and story for years to come.

Travel to the planes beyond the Material Plane can be accomplished in
two ways: by casting a spell or by using a planar portal.

:bi:`Spells`. A number of spells allow direct or indirect access to
other planes of existence. *Plane shift* and *gate* can transport
adventurers directly to any other plane of existence, with different
degrees of precision. *Etherealness* allows adventurers to enter the
Ethereal Plane and travel from there to any of the planes it
touches â€” such as the Elemental Planes. And the *astral projection* spell
lets adventurers project themselves into the Astral Plane and travel to
the Outer Planes.

:bi:`Portals`. A portal is a general term for a stationary interplanar
connection that links a specific location on one plane to a specific
location on another. Some portals are like doorways, a clear window, or
a fog- shrouded passage, and simply stepping through it effects the
interplanar travel. Others are locations â€” circles of standing stones,
soaring towers, sailing ships, or even whole towns â€” that exist in
multiple planes at once or flicker from one plane to another in turn.
Some are vortices, typically joining an Elemental Plane with a very
similar location on the Material Plane, such as the heart of a volcano
(leading to the Plane of Fire) or the depths of the ocean (to the Plane
of Water).

Transitive Planes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane are called the Transitive
Planes. They are mostly featureless realms that serve primarily as ways
to travel from one plane to another. Spells such as *etherealness* and
*astral projection* allow characters to enter these planes and traverse
them to reach the planes beyond.

The **Ethereal Plane** is a misty, fog-bound dimension that is sometimes
described as a great ocean. Its shores, called the Border Ethereal,
overlap the Material Plane and the Inner Planes, so that every location
on those planes has a corresponding location on the Ethereal Plane.
Certain creatures can see into the Border Ethereal, and the *see
invisibility* and *true seeing* spell grant that ability. Some magical
effects also extend from the Material Plane into the Border Ethereal,
particularly effects that use force energy such as *forcecage* and *wall
of force*. The depths of the plane, the Deep Ethereal, are a region of
swirling mists and colorful fogs.

The **Astral Plane** is the realm of thought and dream, where visitors
travel as disembodied souls to reach the planes of the divine and
demonic. It is a great, silvery sea, the same above and below, with
swirling wisps of white and gray streaking among motes of light
resembling distant stars. Erratic whirlpools of color flicker in midair
like spinning coins. Occasional bits of solid matter can be found here,
but most of the Astral Plane is an endless, open domain.

Inner Planes
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Inner Planes surround and enfold the Material Plane and its echoes,
providing the raw elemental substance from which all the worlds were
made. The four **Elemental Planes** - Air, Earth, Fire, and Water - form
a ring around the Material Plane, suspended within the churning
**Elemental Chaos**.

At their innermost edges, where they are closest to the Material Plane
(in a conceptual if not a literal geographical sense), the four
Elemental Planes resemble a world in the Material Plane. The four
elements mingle together as they do in the Material Plane, forming land,
sea, and sky. Farther from the Material Plane, though, the Elemental
Planes are both alien and hostile. Here, the elements exist in their
purest form â€” great expanses of solid earth, blazing fire, crystal-clear
water, and unsullied air. These regions are little-known, so when
discussing the Plane of Fire, for example, a speaker usually means just
the border region. At the farthest extents of the Inner Planes, the pure
elements dissolve and bleed together into an unending tumult of clashing
energies and colliding substance, the Elemental Chaos.

Outer Planes
~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy that makes up the
multiverse, the Outer Planes are the direction, thought and purpose for
such construction. Accordingly, many sages refer to the Outer Planes as
divine planes, spiritual planes, or godly planes, for the Outer Planes
are best known as the homes of deities.

When discussing anything to do with deities, the language used must be
highly metaphorical. Their actual homes are not literally "places" at
all, but exemplify the idea that the Outer Planes are realms of thought
and spirit. As with the Elemental Planes, one can imagine the
perceptible part of the Outer Planes as a sort of border region, while
extensive spiritual regions lie beyond ordinary sensory experience.

Even in those perceptible regions, appearances can be deceptive.
Initially, many of the Outer Planes appear hospitable and familiar to
natives of the Material Plane. But the landscape can change at the whims
of the powerful forces that live on the Outer Planes. The desires of the
mighty forces that dwell on these planes can remake them completely,
effectively erasing and rebuilding existence itself to better fulfill
their own needs.

Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the Outer Planes. The
perceptible regions of the planes often seem quite small, but they can
also stretch on to what seems like infinity. It might be possible to
take a guided tour of the Nine Hells, from the first layer to the ninth,
in a single day â€” if the powers of the Hells desire it. Or it could take
weeks for travelers to make a grueling trek across a single layer.

The most well-known Outer Planes are a group of sixteen planes that
correspond to the eight alignments (excluding neutrality) and the shades
of distinction between them.

Outer Planes
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The planes with some element of good in their nature are called the
**Upper Planes**. Celestial creatures such as angels and pegasi dwell in
the Upper Planes. Planes with some element of evil are the **Lower
Planes**. Fiends such as demons and devils dwell in the Lower Planes. A
plane's alignment is its essence, and a character whose alignment
doesn't match the plane's experiences a profound sense of dissonance
there. When a good creature visits Elysium, for example (a neutral good
Upper Plane), it feels in tune with the plane, but an evil creature
feels out of tune and more than a little uncomfortable.

Demiplanes
^^^^^^^^^^

Demiplanes are small extradimensional spaces with their own unique
rules. They are pieces of reality that don't seem to fit anywhere else.
Demiplanes come into being by a variety of means. Some are created by
spells, such as *demiplane*, or generated at the desire of a powerful
deity or other force. They may exist naturally, as a fold of existing
reality that has been pinched off from the rest of the multiverse, or as
a baby universe growing in power. A given demiplane can be entered
through a single point where it touches another plane. Theoretically, a
*plane shift* spell can also carry travelers to a demiplane, but the
proper frequency required for the tuning fork is extremely hard to
acquire. The *gate* spell is more reliable, assuming the caster knows of
the demiplane.
