.. -*- mode: rst; coding: utf-8 -*-

.. index:: ! racial traits
   double: race; traits

=============
Racial Traits
=============

The description of each race includes racial traits that are common to
members of that race. The following entries appear among the traits of
most races.


.. index::
   double: race; ability score increase
   double: race; ASI

Ability Score Increase
----------------------

Every race increases one or more of a character's ability scores.


.. index:: ! age
   double: race; age

Age
---

The age entry notes the age when a member of the race is considered an
adult, as well as the race's expected lifespan. This information can
help you decide how old your character is at the start of the game. You
can choose any age for your character, which could provide an
explanation for some of your ability scores. For example, if you play a
young or very old character, your age could explain a particularly low
Strength or Constitution score, while advanced age could account for a
high Intelligence or Wisdom.


.. index::
   triple: racial; alignment; tendency

Alignment
---------

Most races have tendencies toward certain alignments, described in this
entry. These are not binding for player characters, but considering why
your dwarf is chaotic, for example, in defiance of lawful dwarf society
can help you better define your character.


.. index::
   double: race; size

Size
----

Characters of most races are Medium, a size category including creatures
that are roughly 4 to 8 feet tall. Members of a few races are Small
(between 2 and 4 feet tall), which means that certain rules of the game
affect them differently. The most important of these rules is that Small
characters have trouble wielding heavy weapons, as explained in
"Equipment."


.. index::
   double: race; speed

Speed
-----

Your speed determines how far you can move when traveling
("Adventuring") and fighting ("Combat").


.. index::
   double: race; languages

Languages
---------

By virtue of your race, your character can speak, read, and write
certain languages.


.. index::
   double: race; subraces

Subraces
--------

Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace have the traits of the
parent race in addition to the traits specified for their subrace.
Relationships among subraces vary significantly from race to race and
world to world.
