.. -*- mode: rst; coding: utf-8 -*-

.. Origin: SRD p195 "Traps"
.. Origin: [Todo: Not in BR]

.. _Traps:

=====
Traps
=====

.. index:: ! traps

Traps can be found almost anywhere. One wrong step in an ancient tomb
might trigger a series of scything blades, which cleave through armor
and bone. The seemingly innocuous vines that hang over a cave entrance
might grasp and choke anyone who pushes through them. A net hidden among
the trees might drop on travelers who pass underneath. In a fantasy
game, unwary adventurers can fall to their deaths, be burned alive, or
fall under a fusillade of poisoned darts.

A trap can be either mechanical or magical in nature. **Mechanical
traps** include pits, arrow traps, falling blocks, water-filled rooms,
whirling blades, and anything else that depends on a mechanism to
operate. **Magic traps** are either magical device traps or spell traps.
Magical device traps initiate spell effects when activated. Spell traps
are spells such as *glyph of warding* and *symbol* that function as
traps.


Traps in Play
-------------

When adventurers come across a trap, you need to know how the trap is
triggered and what it does, as well as the possibility for the
characters to detect the trap and to disable or avoid it.


Triggering a Trap
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. index::
   double: triggering; traps

Most traps are triggered when a creature goes somewhere or touches
something that the trap's creator wanted to protect. Common triggers
include stepping on a pressure plate or a false section of floor,
pulling a trip wire, turning a doorknob, and using the wrong key in a
lock. Magic traps are often set to go off when a creature enters an area
or touches an object. Some magic traps (such as the :ref:`glyph of warding` spell) have more complicated trigger conditions, including a password
that prevents the trap from activating.


Detecting and Disabling a Trap
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. index::
   double: detecting; traps
   double: disabling; traps

Usually, some element of a trap is visible to careful inspection.
Characters might notice an uneven flagstone that conceals a pressure
plate, spot the gleam of light off a trip wire, notice small holes in
the walls from which jets of flame will erupt, or otherwise detect
something that points to a trap's presence.

.. index::
   double: traps; difficulty
   double: traps; DC

A trap's description specifies the checks and DCs needed to detect it,
disable it, or both. A character actively looking for a trap can
attempt a :ref:`Wisdom (Perception) <perception>` check against the
trap's DC. You can also compare the DC to detect the trap with each
character's passive :ref:`Wisdom (Perception) <perception>` score to
determine whether anyone in the party notices the trap in passing. If
the adventurers detect a trap before triggering it, they might be able
to disarm it, either permanently or long enough to move past it. You
might call for an :ref:`Intelligence (Investigation) <investigation>`
check for a character to deduce what needs to be done, followed by a
Dexterity check using thieves' tools to perform the necessary
sabotage.

.. index::
   double: disarming; traps

Any character can attempt an :ref:`Intelligence (Arcana) <arcana>` check to detect or
disarm a magic trap, in addition to any other checks noted in the trap's
description. The DCs are the same regardless of the check used. In
addition, *:ref:`dispel magic`* has a chance of disabling most magic traps. A
magic trap's description provides the DC for the ability check made when
you use *:ref:`dispel magic`*.

In most cases, a trap's description is clear enough that you can
adjudicate whether a character's actions locate or foil the trap. As
with many situations, you shouldn't allow die rolling to override clever
play and good planning. Use your common sense, drawing on the trap's
description to determine what happens. No trap's design can anticipate
every possible action that the characters might attempt.

.. index::
   double: discovering; traps

You should allow a character to discover a trap without making an
ability check if an action would clearly reveal the trap's presence. For
example, if a character lifts a rug that conceals a pressure plate, the
character has found the trigger and no check is required.

.. index::
   double: foiling; traps

Foiling traps can be a little more complicated. Consider a trapped
treasure chest. If the chest is opened without first pulling on the two
handles set in its sides, a mechanism inside fires a hail of poison
needles toward anyone in front of it. After inspecting the chest and
making a few checks, the characters are still unsure if it's trapped.
Rather than simply open the chest, they prop a shield in front of it and
push the chest open at a distance with an iron rod. In this case, the
trap still triggers, but the hail of needles fires harmlessly into the
shield.

Traps are often designed with mechanisms that allow them to be disarmed
or bypassed. Intelligent monsters that place traps in or around their
lairs need ways to get past those traps without harming themselves. Such
traps might have hidden levers that disable their triggers, or a secret
door might conceal a passage that goes around the trap.


Trap Effects
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. index::
   double: traps; effects

The effects of traps can range from inconvenient to deadly, making use
of elements such as arrows, spikes, blades, poison, toxic gas, blasts of
fire, and deep pits. The deadliest traps combine multiple elements to
kill, injure, contain, or drive off any creature unfortunate enough to
trigger them. A trap's description specifies what happens when it is
triggered.

The attack bonus of a trap, the save DC to resist its effects, and the
damage it deals can vary depending on the trap's severity. Use the Trap
Save DCs and Attack Bonuses table and the Damage Severity by Level table
for suggestions based on three levels of trap severity.

.. index::
   double: setback; traps
   double: dangerous; traps
   double: deadly; traps

A trap intended to be a **setback** is unlikely to kill or seriously
harm characters of the indicated levels, whereas a **dangerous** trap is
likely to seriously injure (and potentially kill) characters of the
indicated levels. A **deadly** trap is likely to kill characters of the
indicated levels.

.. table:: Traps: Save DCs and Attack Bonuses

  +-------------+---------+--------------------+
  | Trap Danger | Save DC | Attack Bonus       |
  +=============+=========+====================+
  | Setback     | 10-11   | +3 to +5           |
  +-------------+---------+--------------------+
  | Dangerous   | 12-15   | +6 to +8           |
  +-------------+---------+--------------------+
  | Deadly      | 16-20   | +9 to +12          |
  +-------------+---------+--------------------+

.. index::
   double: traps; severity

.. table:: Traps: Damage Severity by Level

  +-----------------+---------+-----------+--------+
  | Character Level | Setback | Dangerous | Deadly |
  +=================+=========+===========+========+
  | 1st-4th         | 1d10    | 2d10      | 4d10   |
  +-----------------+---------+-----------+--------+
  | 5th-10th        | 2d10    | 4d10      | 10d10  |
  +-----------------+---------+-----------+--------+
  | 11th-16th       | 4d10    | 10d10     | 18d10  |
  +-----------------+---------+-----------+--------+
  | 17th-20th       | 10d10   | 18d10     | 24d10  |
  +-----------------+---------+-----------+--------+


Complex Traps
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. index::
   double: complex; traps

Complex traps work like standard traps, except once activated they
execute a series of actions each round. A complex trap turns the process
of dealing with a trap into something more like a combat encounter.

When a complex trap activates, it rolls initiative. The trap's
description includes an initiative bonus. On its turn, the trap
activates again, often taking an action. It might make successive
attacks against intruders, create an effect that changes over time, or
otherwise produce a dynamic challenge. Otherwise, the complex trap can
be detected and disabled or bypassed in the usual ways.

For example, a trap that causes a room to slowly flood works best as a
complex trap. On the trap's turn, the water level rises. After several
rounds, the room is completely flooded.


Sample Traps
------------

The magical and mechanical traps presented here vary in deadliness and
are presented in alphabetical order.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Traps

   trap/collapsing-roof
   trap/falling-net
   trap/fire-breathing-statue
   trap/pits
   trap/poison-darts
   trap/poison-needle
   trap/rolling-sphere
   trap/sphere-of-annihilation
